# Lesson Challenge

This articles is a summary of the following articles:

- [x] [Organizing State](https://redux.js.org/faq/organizing-state)
- [x] [Normalizing State Shape](https://redux.js.org/recipes/structuring-reducers/normalizing-state-shape)
- [x] [Redux for state management in large web apps](https://blog.mapbox.com/redux-for-state-management-in-large-web-apps-c7f3fab3ce9b)
- [x] [Five Tips for Working with Redux in Large Applications](https://medium.com/xandr-tech/five-tips-for-working-with-redux-in-large-applications-89452af4fdcb).

It answers the folowing questions:

1. [How should state be organized in Redux applications?](#how-should-state-be-organized-in-redux-applications)

2. [Where is the concept of data immutability applicable in React?](#where-is-the-concept-of-data-immutability-applicable-in-react)

3. [What does state normalization mean?](#what-does-state-normalization-mean)

## How should state be organized in Redux applications

State should be organized based on the performance need of the app.

### Stores, Reducers, Action Creators and Selectors

Recommendations for managing state is to use **sub-stores and slice reducers** that handle just a slice of the general state.

A user triggers a command, an **action creator** handles that command by dispatching a single **action** or multiple actions.
These actions can be accesed from React components by using react-redux **mapDispatchToProps** function

These actions are then handled by their specific **slice reducer** which update the **sub-store** they are concerned with.

To get back the data from the Redux store, [selectors](#selectors) are used in the react-redux **mapStateToProps** function

#### Indexing

An **index** is a javascript object in which the keys are the ids of the data objects we’re storing, and the value is the actual data objects themselves.

> Indexing helps save time and simplify retrieval code.

For example an array of users received from the DB stored as an object where each key is the id of each user.

That way we don't have to map over the array to find or update a user

```js
{
 "usersById": {
    123: {
      id: 123,
      name: "Jane Doe",
      email: "jdoe@example.com",
      phone: "555-555-5555",
      ...
    },
    ...
  }
}
```

#### Selectors

This is a function that takes in state and returns the required data

```js
const getSelectedUsers = ({ selectedUserIds, usersById }) => {
  return selectedUserIds.map((id) => usersById[id]);
};
```

By using selectors, we increase code maintainability

> Consider using [reselect](https://github.com/reduxjs/reselect#createselectorcreatormemoize-memoizeoptions) for selectors

### Cannonical & View State

It is best to keep data retrieved from API calls, **cannonical state** separate from data being edited by the user, **view state**.
This way, should the user start say, editing his profile details, and in between cancel the edit:

- the state of that edit is saved in the view state and can be retrieved later one
- the data received from the API call does not change in the state until the user saves the changes

Example of separate view and cannonical state is shown below

```js
{
 "usersById": {
    123: {
      id: 123,
      name: "Jane Doe",
      email: "jdoe@example.com",
      phone: "555-555-5555",
      ...
    },
    ...
  },
  "editingUsersById": {
    123: {
      id: 123,
      name: "Jane Smith",
      email: "jsmith@example.com",
      phone: "555-555-5555",
    }
  }
}
```

### What data goes into the Redux store?

Simple rule of thumb to use is:

- Do other parts of the application care about this data?
- Do you need to be able to create further derived data based on this original data?
- Is the same data being used to drive multiple components?
- Is there value to you in being able to restore this state to a given point in time (ie, time travel debugging)?
- Do you want to cache the data (ie, use what's in state if it's already there instead of re-requesting it)?
- Do you want to keep this data consistent while hot-reloading UI components (which may lose their internal state when swapped)?

## Where is the concept of data immutability applicable in React?

The concept of data immutability is applicable in redux store state.

Here, the state cannot change its value except by calling action events.

These action events are then handled by reducers who do not change the state, but returns a new state from the old one

## What does state normalization mean?

It is the recommended approach to managing relational or nested data in a Redux store.

### Basic concepts of normalization

- Each type of data gegts its own **_table_** in the state
- Each **_data table_** should store the individual items in an object, with the IDs of the items as keys and items themselves as values
- Any references to individual items should be done by storing the item's ID
- Arrays of IDs should be used to indicate ordering

### Benefit of normalizing state data

The major benefit of normalizing state data is **improved performance**, as it ensures the following:

- Changes in multiple places are prevented as each item is only defined in a single place

- The reducer logic is simpler as it doesn't have to deal with different levels of nesting

- The logic for retrieving or updating a given item is fairly simple and consistent

- Lesser portions of the state tree are required for state update

### Organizing Normalized Data in State

All relational **_tables_** should be under a parent key called **entities**

For relational tables that are being edited, the current edit can be stored under a parent key called **work_in_progress**, while the current data remains under **current**.

When the changes in the **work_in_progress** have been submitted, then the data in **current** is updated and that in **work_in_progress** is cleared

### Table Relationships

These tables can appply many of the principles of database design.
For example join is shown below:

```js
{
    entities: {
        authors : { byId : {}, allIds : [] },
        books : { byId : {}, allIds : [] },
        authorBook : {
            byId : {
                1 : {
                    id : 1,
                    authorId : 5,
                    bookId : 22
                },
                2 : {
                    id : 2,
                    authorId : 5,
                    bookId : 15,
                },
                3 : {
                    id : 3,
                    authorId : 42,
                    bookId : 12
                }
            },
            allIds : [1, 2, 3]
        }
    }
}
```

> Refer to [normalizr](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr) for normalizing nested API data
